How are you?
Can you hear me?
How are yougrid Manteksop
Beiberitt
how are you?
I think they just want to push forward.
Yes.
Thank you.
Pointing, perhaps.
I'm not sure what's going on.
Is it on?
I'm at the session director of the center.
Thank you very much for coming in this beautiful weather.
Before I announce today's program, I'll tell you about our program in two weeks, which is on
non-humans, continuities, continuities.
And then next Friday we have our benefices club.
Today's program is on trauma and it's after effects.
And it's part one of two that we are starting.
The second one will be in the fall.
The participants, and I'm going to summarize what there is here, is Adam Sacks, the candidate in the department of history at Brown University.
In 2010, he served as an Auschwitz-Jewish center fellow under the auspices of the Museum of Jewish Heritage in New York.
And from 2011 to 2012, he was the Kahneman Foundation Fellow at the center for Jewish history in New York and was awarded the dissertation grant of the Central European History Society.
What else can I tell you?
He has been long concerned with cultural responses to catastrophe and he has engaged issues of trauma, war, genocide and cultural representation and production.
Publications on these themes have appeared in New German critic, the Association for Jewish Studies Journal, as well as a forthcoming conference proceedings under the ages of the Armenian Genocide Institute and Museum.
Ryan Talalian is a PhD student in clinical psychology at the New School.
He has a master's of divinity from the St. Vladimir's Orthodox Theological Seminary and a certificate in Armenian Studies from St. Nersez-Arminian Cemetery.
St. Nersez and I are not related.
His wide range of research interests include the relationship between psychology and theology, positive and existential psychology, forensic psychology and therapeutic applications of binaural beats.
Godfred Wagner is a music college media director and publisher. He is here visiting us from Italy. He works internationally as a lecturer of music and politics.
He completed his PhD in Vienna and is now based in Milan.
His studies are centered on German culture and politics of the 19th and 20th century in connection with Jewish culture and history.
He has published on Kurt Weil and Bertolt Wert and taught in universities and culture institutions on five continents.
He was engaged with the post-show opera Lost Childhood with music by Janish Hammer and Liberato by Mary Israel, which was developed since 1992 and first presented in 2014.
His autobiography The Twilight of the Wagner's was translated into seven languages. His last book, Thou Shall Have No Other Gods Beside Me, Richard Wagner and Meinfeld was published in Germany in 2013 and in Poland in 2014.
Eva Weil, who is here from Paris, is a member of the Paris Psychology Research at the Sorbonne University and at the Center of the Saint-Conasional de la Vacherciante Fic.
She is a researcher at the University of Paris set on the theme of psychoanalysis and medicine and directs to psychoanalysts in the Society of Paris.
Phil Zabriski is the author of Kill Switch, a highly acclaimed Kindle single about American soldiers and Marines learning to take life in combat with this particular aspect of their experience once they return home.
Previously he spent nearly a decade living and working as a journalist overseas primarily as a staff writer for Time magazine in Asia and the Middle East covering both Afghanistan and Iraq, along with news and events in Pakistan, Israel and the Palestinian territories, plus in Indonesia the Philippines, Vietnam and elsewhere.
He has been both a fellow and a senior fellow with the Dart Foundation for Journalism and Trauma, spoken at the State Department, the New America Foundation's Future of War Conference, New York University Law School and twice as a visiting author at the Sombally Writers Conference.
He was recently honored with the Bates Barnum Outstanding Achievement Award by his graduating class at Princeton University.
I am a distinguished panel and welcome our guest from Europe especially and I hope that the volume is acceptable. I will raise my voice.
I will bring to knowledge of trauma and the experience of it because from one point of view trauma perhaps could be seen as making the world a stranger place or making removing a sense of home from an individual in the world and whether that be descendants of trauma,
whether that be family member or have the role as bystander. So I thought I just had the question that I would love to hear all of the other panelists answer very simply is how did they first become a result of a trauma
one could argue either there are genetic or physiological components that we all have a passive birth of trauma but how did we actually begin to confront and engage the challenge that trauma poses to writing history telling stories about ourselves, about our families, the countries, the world that we live in?
Anybody can pick up from there?
I don't think I have an answer to the question I wonder if anybody here has but still we psychoanalysts, we are bored, I'm sorry first of all I wanted to say thank you for inviting me and English is not my first language so I'll try to be comprehensible by you and please interrupt me if you don't understand.
For a psychoanalysts we get to trauma through the... that means that we immediately go into the field of psychopatology in a way which means that we know the trauma of course as a person, as a person we know the trauma like anybody else and even more but as professional we know the trauma by its effects.
The effects it has on the people and probably the patients that come to us which is in the way of some kind of a bias because we only know of the pathologic of psychopatologic effects of trauma and so we have to work all the way back to what is trauma how is it in the
theory since the beginning but I won't go into it now I think we can discuss psychopatology or not.
But not you mean every... there could be alterations after a trauma that will not necessarily be psychopatology or every alteration is going to be psychopatology.
I don't think it's every head is psychopatology but we... the course, I mean the field of the theory relates to psychopatology which is the field of psychoanalysts in fact which is a real bias that we hope we can discuss between us because that's all we're supposed to know about.
This seems to start with questions and I think probably reflects each of us in our own backgrounds and such and I think for me it was growing up at a time at the height of the Cold War essentially and so all the stories that are associated with that and then that you learned through history you think
one is perhaps inclined to think well what happened to those people you know what's the story after this story I've just heard and how do you then investigate that and as you get older you see these things are consistently happening and not only are they happening in real time but it seems a bit of the nature of trauma is that it stops time and then stops populations or individuals freezes them in a given moment that could have been a year ago it could have been a hundred years ago could
have been 500 years ago and you constantly get these opportunities to ask more questions and try to figure out how did it happen what happened afterwards how does it manifest and you know in a way we all have plenty of material to work with for better and for worse but you know once you start asking those questions it's kind of hard to stop.
Well I think part of what we do need to do is define what trauma is and I think you've provided a good example of this experience of wanting to make some meaning out of something that's happened to us or to other people for that matter and trauma I would if I can just
I can just proper my own definition which is of course compiled by composed of things that other people have said for me is that trauma is that which our psyche can't deal with we can't make meaning out of that experience there's not some
easy way that we can plug it in as you've notion of who we are who another person is and what that relationship looks looks like so I think to think of when I became aware of trauma would be in my own personal experience to think about when was a point in my life the first point in my life where I thought I can't make sense out of this what is going on
and of course and also how closely it is related for the starting point to become later on having chosen also the way of a historian or a psychotherapist there are always deep reasons why we go astray
and we get interested and committed also for life so first of all I also want to thank for the invitation my name is Scott Vardna and I'm I came to the topic already very early as a child I grew up in Bavaria in the so-called American
patient zone and there was a re-program and there was a cannot imagine but that was a time without television so what the information we got by the really news there was a kind of free news no television so we they put us in 600 kids in a huge cinema
and we saw the rise and the fall of the third Reich without having been prepared by teachers parents and grandparents we know also why but anyway we went in and so we were
and this was not the time of cruel video games it's also very important it's a very boring provincial city the best thing was for me always the highway even that was built by out of Hitler which I found out later on but the way to escape from this provincial city nothing happened so we were confronted without being informed on the third Reich
so we saw 600 kids Hitler then what he did all for the German people and all this combination with Nuremberg and then I even listened to the music Nuremberg with Riechad Wagner which I as a kid heard in a different connection and then it was even shown
with the Wagner plan so and then Nick's sequence was then World War II and it ended even worse with pictures from Buchenwald concentration camp so the after effect of 600 kids was immediate because normally we were rather normal kids
oh no school is finished so one went out of the cinema as a group experience also in deep silence but in this variation my situation was different because the family was shown on the screen so there was this kind of association immediately
oh these are all Nazis and they have to do with a place Buchenwald and what is about the Jews and so this was all a kind of a really yes I would say this was a really the start of a trauma and then also becoming reacting and wanted to I wanted to know more what was going on and that certainly was a starting point for the life I later on followed up
I think Dr. Wagner has introduced some of the direct content if we link the two parts of the program war and genocide specifically with trauma and when we think about it the 20th century is a century that really has been defined by the trauma of war and genocide
and no previous generations in history ever had to live and die with the knowledge of Auschwitz, Hiroshima, the Armenian genocide and therefore trauma in a way is universal and germane to the human race in an innocent
are in a unique way that will define for the rest of human history its very presence and learning of the genocide is part and trauma is now part of a human education and trauma is unavoidable
and at the other hand as Ryan was saying in some sense impossible because we can't grasp it or it can't be written or it can't be assimilated psychically perhaps and just to perhaps connect it to the note of well in a very basic terms really what is the trauma of war and genocide
and I think to put it in very simple terms I would perhaps propose its death its mass death death in in in imaginably large scale and numbers and I know that when Phil's work investigates directly people who have the experience with death at least in some ways
I think in some ways I mean related to what you're talking about is the perpetrators of trauma are probably less studied less understood because they're less likely to talk or you may not want to talk to them or whatever they may be in prison whatever it might be
I would though expand I mean I would think you know
people who are in a very large population war and death are definitely a big part of it but if we look in this country now I think trauma is very much associated with soldiers even though far and away the most trauma victims are rape victims
so I don't think it's just I mean which could be called a kind of a death I mean but a kind of a you know as injurious as it could as can be but in terms of getting to that point where I was interested in what happens when people kill
it's that came over time as well because there's all these different elements and once you know because I've been doing this for a while and and the almost default setting is to go to the victims
you know go to the people who've experienced it and absorbed it without getting both sides so to speak and it's not a sort of equivalency but but it's just parties to this thing and both roles matter
I mean I think both roles matter you know who it was that injured you who it was that killed your people your family whatever it's all related in a way that I think is is relevant for a long time to come and just as you say when you look at the 20th century
we can go back further I mean we talk about Native Americans in this country what happens to those people who do this thing to you and your people that matters and what happens on the flip side as well it all matters in the evolution of one's
own experience of trauma their own and their people say that's it's it's a
Ebel and I had lunch yesterday and we were talking about the study of perpetrators and the importance of doing that study but do you think it's possible that the perpetrators have not been studied enough not only because they're not available
because obviously large number of them are available in Cambodia but that we really are not that interested in hearing their story because in a way it's happening a little bit with Turkey they have an explanation for their behavior so why would we be interested
sure well I think that I think that's true and I think I think on a larger scale especially when you get something like Turkey you get the political explanation that everyone is supposed to follow on that side so to speak
you it's hard to work around it and and and I think you have to find individuals really and then individuals who are willing to talk about it individuals who are able to articulate it in some way and and really a
a setting that works and I you know I think we've probably all been the panels like this before and even the most interesting ones are somewhat controlled I'd say measured and I happen to go to this thing the other night it's called theater of war it's a group that
reads classical plays about war usually to soldiers and soldier and groups related to soldiers and they did one for journalists who had covered war and they had David straight hair in the actor and Francis McDormand reading from
Sophocleses Ajax and I thought it was to be you know they'll sit around a table and I'll do a nice little reading and whatever and I walked in a little late and David Straythorn was shouting and Francis McDormand was wailing and like having that injection of it into the more intellectual discussion
was fascinating and jarring and nearly overwhelming to be to be honest with you and I think that that's what's hard about studying some of these things where you have Ajax as rendered by Straythair and talking about the feeling of you know disseminating death essentially
in ways that you rarely get when you look at when you have more clinical settings or more standard interview settings so you're raising an interesting point it's not that we don't want to hear about it because we don't want to hear the justification
we also don't want to hear about it because if the person expresses the emotions it would just make us too anxious to sit there and listen to it well in part and I think it triggers a lot of things but I also think we all know as we hear these stories
there's an impact on us as well I mean this is dark stuff this is this is not you know we have we have a beautiful Saturday afternoon and we're talking about this I mean I think it's it's that's a version of I think what happens when you study these things
you start asking these questions and then maybe you all have had similar experiences but then it becomes something you yourself have to bear and that's that's hard and I think that's hard for populations at large to do
it's not only I think you're right it's not that we don't want to hear but first of all perpetrators usually I'm talking about war perpetrators they don't usually seek for help or seek for anything outside because they act for instance
the Nuremberg trial is a point disappointing it's a it's a small word for what happens a small world not it's that they were not guilty and they didn't say anything about what happened
I'm taking the Nuremberg trial because it's an icon you say an icon so usually we don't know anything about perpetrators we know now being in 2015 we know a lot about victims we know more and more I don't think we can even I'm not sure we can know more than we know now about victims but the other side
let's say the we if the victims have witnesses of what happened of history the perpetrators are witnesses to and the bystanders are with witnesses as well so we know very little about perpetrators and it seems to me that the focus has shifted now to the perpetrators
and the way of knowing directly what happened there wouldn't talk otherwise there wouldn't be pepper traces maybe that's any purchases if they would talk and present what they will do or not do maybe there won't be perpetrators I don't know but still I wanted to stress two points maybe which seems very obvious we're talking about collective trauma today and the way that it's
resented by individual which is a field maybe we could go in with late to trauma like could be could appear as everybody war genocide it's just I mean everybody goes through it but everybody reacts in some
and then that it's man-made disaster we're talking about not what happens in a in a life but it's manufactured disaster to other men which makes it very complicated it raises the issue of evil you say evil and for us
cycle analysis evil is not a psychological notion but we still we have death drive we have all kinds of other words for it but evil is not so we have to deal and in fact it's not fascinating is not the good word for it but what makes people
address kill because we talked about this before that's the main the main issue of our of our research if we are researchers so I think we can maybe we have not yet talked about transmission transmission of trauma to the other generation second third maybe fourth generation we have not yet talked because we're just starting our panel but I think we'll get to it
so what happens to the transmission of the paper traders what happens to the other generations to children grandchildren second third generation maybe it's a way because our patients we have had I'm sure all well the people
who are in this audience they they heard about descendants of paper traders being asking for help so maybe this is a way of knowing more but it's only a suggestion
but anyway I think it's I can talk also about a certain one experience when I was discussing with Aishma and junior and Hebrew University in Jerusalem as well those who really have this kind of top Nazis as fathers they believe me they also there are some traumatic stories to tell
and when you meet then in Jerusalem to discuss that I was done but on your might of course born voice for the discussion for the contract how can we start a dialogue it's much too much how can we come from all walks one day to the discussion
Monday might be personally even to a dialogue and then communicated even via books and publications and the possibilities we have for the video there's still a lot has to be done a lot of work and as you said rightly but of course that's might be I would like to know from you
now with the kind of his also historical distance always very close we have the trial of course then of Aishma in Israel and which of course you know the famous book then of Hannah Arendt and all the after effects even of include my generation how to handle those extremely prominent voices
as also then part of the Numbach trial and I see now we have 70 years after we talk about 1945 and I'm a witness of the discussion also in Europe especially in Germany was still exploding when you touch these topics it's amazing
and so when we talk about also was just two weeks ago in Istanbul and they have their president who's publicly denied you know the genocide of Armenians and now he found himself under high pressure
by the Pope fence fences by the German French Italian government and suddenly he had to make a step which was quite an international tough discussion and even for me as a participant in this kind of experience genocide talking about the show the genocide
and the Canadian genocide finding yourself with having in our case as a group bodyguards to talk about it shows that still is everything is very delicate and sensitive so we have to choose very well our words when we touch these
browns but you are you are expressing something about the after effect of trauma hundred years afterwards so it's because of the Armenian it's hundred years and we can still watch I don't know if we can destroy them after effects after one century
show our 70 years so maybe there is a period of social latency which is like well I thought I want some I published something about that being 40 years social so collective latency that it takes even in Vietnam it took even the Algerian war in France it's very important what
happened anyway like a very long period of time which it's more or less that say more than less and we don't know why it is it is silent because the victims wouldn't talk which I don't think it's true the recipients wouldn't listen
it takes about 40 50 years of collective latency I'll say it again to bring the topic into the public scene and so people could feel free to tell those stories which maybe they couldn't feel feel somebody will listen to them too
I think the leg of it yes we don't sometimes we're living in this kind of also a self-censorship I mean I'm talking about the media I mean really who really asked them in a way
but why why censorship self-censorship also else and yesterday we talked about why hundred years afterward it is so important to deny the genocide what does it make any difference to Turkey now to recognize that has been a genocide what would it change
so there must be a psychic it's not economic because there is no economic but I have to defend the groups of those young Turkish people and have contact with them they do really outstanding work serious work and they do not get the right chance in the Turkish media
so this is I think so he'll be talking about politics again so it you better don't touch certain topics but the time now in Turkey I'm sure that it's changing
even after the collective latency is the belated recognition the belatedness of what actual psychic recognition happens after the period of latency and clearly the case with Turkey that they haven't even begun that process which means rewriting the textbooks
changing their national identity to some to some way that has not that they have evaded and eluded to some extent and just as a brief note about perpetrator versus victim it's kind of interesting that in the historical scholastic
studies of the debates about war and genocide are from the perspective of the choices made that war and genocide is a can be a political choice made by governments and that option has been produced in the modern world because it's
ongoing in Darfur in Sudan to some extent in the middle east. Although it's fascinating to hear that from the psychoanalytic research point of view the individual analysis has focused more on victims rather than perpetrators
in some of the research that has been done on perpetrators of evil a couple of very interesting things one is that perpetrators just look normal they don't look that differently than we do they don't
they would have normal well we would hope we would hope but the scary part is that as much as we get into an investigated I think we understand that within us there is evil or we are capable of doing evil however you want to you know phenomenologize that
construct but I think that that's one reason why we wouldn't want to study it so much because well it there isn't it's so hard to explain and I think even harder to explain on a collective you talk about rape and that's a very violent act done
let's just say one person to one person and that's hard enough to explain I think that some levels trauma can also be called the thing that tells you the world is not what you
it just upsets that balance and if you talk about I mean to both your points if you talk about a period of latency when a society or people have to begin to process this thing that's not happening in a vacuum at the same time there's competing forces that would want to
be that narrative and use it for whatever their purposes might be and you know to say there's something inside us that means we could all be prone to horrendous acts is a similar thing that thing is developing and the context around us or the people around us who are creating the narrative
and figuring out a way to try to make you tip over to that side where you will do those things is out there I mean it could be it could happen in any number of ways I mean like you say you were seeing these films as a young as you know as a boy and then seeing that happen rendered in ten minutes the whole process or however long the film was I mean like that is a thing that is going on
and I'm sure some of these people that are that were at rallies early on in Nazi Germany or in other circumstances exactly like us I mean I think they were and they were us in some ways but the context was such and the charisma behind the people or the individuals or whatever
who had this way to tell you or tell me that the context of your life is this so you should do this and it is possible to make people believe that but then of course also for me for the perpetrators when we always were as important to know how the children
and perpetrators are educated are confronted with the war and might be the war crimes of the fathers so here we are and as we know if this is not discussed out already within the families it goes on from generation to generation
and you know it's it's not finished with that if the courage at least within the family one day to put it on the really to discuss that out even with pain but it's necessary to do that so I'm talking about really now the third and fourth generations
of course now I'm talking about I'm also Italian citizens so I have the confrontation with Italian fascism and denial to work over that seriously you know so the way it is treated also these days of remembrance
it is enormously superficial and it's always touching you know in a way which is not acceptable so of course here we are again we're entering the media what are we doing we do one day in such a way you see all the horrors one day of Auschwitz
now and the next generation is paralyzed you know but instead of creating a continuity of serious teaching at school at university in media now there's so much still to do only in Europe but also in the United States to make it much more profound
I can ask you a question when you say when you start to undertake an investigation of your own family and their relationship to this did you have resistance from other people in your family?
from all generations I mean my sisters represent officially the Wagner festival in pyroids and with now especially also again with my last book of course you know this is absolutely taboo book for Germans to have a society
so anyway now I'm not any longer in my 20 so you have to make my own life and you see that and that I'm not any longer in my 20 so it's time at least for the next generation talking about my son and might be one day also my grandchildren and I want to not to leave this kind of not to act over past
but it can come usually it comes very often even with the other world run it means that the grandchildren they ask the grandparents and well we have all kind of explanation like for instance that for the survivors I'm talking about the survivor part
but it was difficult for the second children of the survivor to ask the parents because of the
and the reason because it's too hot and too close to close to one development but grandchildren often very often ask the grandparents because it's generation later they can ask it's gone into history with a big age and don't say if you say that big and great age
so it's not only the personal history but it goes into but it goes on into generation different forms so very often the grandchildren ask questions and even Germany there was one German researcher Vensler I think yes he was famous yes he made research and the the title of his book is no grandfather was not a Nazi yes although he was but the narrative of the story
by the grandchildren is to always pick up a nice event in the in the life of the Nazi yes I mean and to show that he had some kind of consolidation of his victims it's very hard to accept that your grandfather more grandfather than grandmother but he was a perpetrator in a way so they do reconstruct the whole history
yes but then of course we also have to take very serious in consideration that we certainly have had for a long time two Germanies not don't forget that the education the communistic system is a completely different one in the in the West Germany and even the problems
the common communication within the Germans from the from the two sides even my generation next generation there's a lot of problems to communicate about that so they had two forms of totalitarianism Hitler reason
Hitler reason then we had Stalinism and so how can you get along with this such a kind and then coming to them to Europe not for Europe so it never ends
we have we have the topic is slowly but shifted from survivors I thought I think everybody sought survivors being victims but we shifted slowly to survivors perpetrators are survivors as well to the one who survived
so it's kind of frame thinking which is changing slowly if we want to get a complete picture of the situation that's what I wanted to say I'm sorry
please that's a very very important for me always a global event in automatically then one is sensitive 70 million people died so all the world is connected and automatically we come to to also your specific
you know those are just two huge points I think one is the slippage between traumatization and victimization and what do they share in common how shall we separate them conceptually and then also between war and genocide that genocide happens kind of structurally
the shadow of war and how do we extract it if we take the case of the Soviet Union where there is no culture of practice of commemorating genocide and the Holocaust specifically because they lost 25 million people so what is six to them therefore
and the way in which though that in contemporary European society that this commemoration has become part of a culture it's become part of a practice and then of course it's over determined by the fact that victims genocidal victims I mean the case of the Armenian Jews were long persecuted
these are minority groups that existed in at the fringes of society that are often exploited for their talents their adaptations socially and culturally as well and it does have a form of exploitation the fact that for effective reasons
that the future groups are chosen in order to employ some of the you know the id instincts essentially in culture but it's also just a response to how the victim groups practice commemoration or develop those practices
I mean just a very colloquial thing that I often run up again discussions about this is a very simple phrase that I've heard from very complicated minds such as why don't they just get over it
and why is it just not dropped and this perhaps could lead to many questions I think one immediate response that Dr. Weil mentioned simply that they haven't gotten it yet there's nowhere to get over it if you haven't gotten it yet
but they do overcome too because we're talking I've started with psychopatology but it's only part of that while showing signs of two victims they never seek any profession
they never seek look for professional help they do overcome and they don't I think it's both in a way because they lead lives they have I mean they construct families they construct institutions
for the victims they do all they they they build a country they they do all kind of it and at the same time
in various from place to place of course I lived in Vietnam for a time and was endlessly fascinated and wish and hope to perhaps look at it more one day but in Vietnam who had the war the French the war the Americans were the Chinese the war the Cambodians I mean not just
forget about some of those other ones and then a near near famine in the 80s and you go there now and the attitude is absolutely like if you'll work with us we'll work with you I mean as an American as a Chinese and they do not like the Chinese that's generalized but they don't like the Chinese
but there's this this sense of like we need to get over there and I don't care what your grandfather did I don't care what your grandfather well I care but more important is how do we get over there
and then you go you know I mean you look in the Middle East and you see like well in the 12th century this happened and so we're still going to fight about it and then why
sorry for me I'm very interested in your points what is the discussion of the young Vietnamese I mean how do they then you talk to them if you're young say you know 20 years old that means when you're a kid the country was nearly starving
and so as you grow up then you get some you know the economy gets loosened up you get some generation of wealth people start actually having possessions they start taking their money out from under the mattress and thinking they can put it in a bank because there's a sense of a future
and then you get a hunt in the Honda scooter was the thing like that that was that meant you had kind of made it and that evolves over time and you look even China right now which you know went through I think one of the if it's not strange to say this but one of the most under
appreciated mass traumas of this past century or last century there are things now and often they are things filling some of those spaces I think and some of it is commercial but some of it is just this sense of like we are moving forward we don't have time for this and it could be a sense of denial it could be like
in the discussion with you when you talk with them personally you talk about your work are they are they curious to know about your point of view?
well the government of Vietnam was not terribly interested in my point of view
okay that's what the people there and I and I remember when when I left I had lunch with the guy who who ran the spokesman from the ministry of foreign affairs and I said to him I really wish we could have talked about this because I think it's very interesting
and I think you have other examples of countries in that area that perhaps show aside what else it might look like but at least in his role he couldn't have that conversation and I don't know how much people would want to dwell on it either and you could call that a form of denial or you could call that
but I think there's also a strong underground email communication there are activities which are of course kept still secret to not put in risk those who are interested now there's a little bit my experience
and you have north of north of north of Vietnamese authors writing memoirs that people sell you on the street I mean yeah and I think and you know because we were talking about mentioning Iraq before when American sniper came out here
talking about attempts to seize a narrative whether it's de facto or just sort of happens but a guy named Brian Turner who was a soldier who read a memoir called My Country Is a Foreign Place or something like that he said we're not going to know the history of this war on our side until we get their side
we need to get those stories too and as they come up somehow and I don't know what the compact is amongst you know again I don't want to speak to you generally but in Vietnam like what was the compact that said we collectively are going to do this
or enough of us are going to do this that becomes the path forward rather than fighting or still fighting or doing whatever else might do they might do to just stay in that place I mean it was like refusing to be frozen in that place that someone else wanted them to be frozen in
So I mean also we had of course a whole discussion with ex Yucusilabia you know what happened there now so now they had the trial at least in Denmark so this is really discussed out in Europe the trial with I think most cruel also form of perpetrators
So here coming to the point what is in your experience of course you are much more qualified than I then the common points when you make comparison can you make comparison between the different in a certain way point of psychoanaly analysis the behavior of perpetrators in the different
throughout is there something which you would say is there deeply inside the human being the very darkest rectus side to to kill we know very little about perpetrators I say
because that's probably the last because that comes to what you say to the core of the evil which is our field of study to what makes people what makes human beings act the way they act but we have only theoretical ed you will correct me do we have anything but
what is the best way to do it? I think we may be in a position where we can ask questions and be able to formulate questions and have any answers whatsoever
but we have a very thick, cynical material that we can but we must be very careful not to generalize observation for what happens on the couch over an hour how you say offices to generalize to what it happens to the whole population
but wouldn't you say that genocide or mass massacre of a wide population is different than the kind of trauma for example soldiers had during the First World War
they had trauma they had symptoms serious symptoms some of them afterwards there's a great deal of money being spent in the US right now on research about post traumatic disorder which has to do with the Iraq war
so there soldiers went as fighters and they ended up being traumatized that seems to me there's a difference between that and what when you deal with the issue of genocide which is where like with the Nazis or with the Turks during 100 years ago
they literally killed children and not that accidentally a bomb blew up and there were a couple of kids around systematically so there is a difference there
I don't know what that is but in one at least you are fighting you have a chance of fighting or you are the fighter yourself and still get traumatized and in the other you are you have absolutely no recourse
absolutely I think the original psychoanalytic impetus I think to develop war and a rosis and trauma theory was originally in the service of the war effort I believe that how can we make a more efficient mechanized soldiers to avoid sons themselves were serving in the Austrian army at the time
I think that the targeted population or the policy which is really a modern option of genocide I mean to come back to this idea of feeling unsafe in the world that somehow the awareness is of it's a matter to extract the very conditions of life for an entire people
and to live under the shadow of a death sentence and specifically if we take the idea the Armenian homeland and the eastern part of Turkey at the time of saying this ancient home of this people will not be there anymore and we can essentially wipe them from the face of history
and the famous quote that Himmler made this will be a never to be written Rheumasplat a page of glory in a never to be written history book as the undertaking that somehow it has a structure of a secret as well that an impossibility that can be carried out but shouldn't be known or disclosed
and clearly it's a distinctive the ability to do it I think the spirit of science it's been argued it's a surgical operation that only after Darwin with population engineering and genetics did it even become possible to conceive of the idea of the removal of a people
that I see all the problems we have in this now right now there are global problems we are talking about from the global indifference because when we are really going to the bottom of the whole discussion which I'm living in a country where we have
last month 80,000 people from different North America from Africa sorry from Syria so we are in a situation that we are concretely confronted with people dead bodies in the sea you know so this is for me it is a very strong signal
also for the academic world in which way we will in future now also confront these issues even in our different disciplines I think it's a major need for me to be more courageous to coordinate much better those who have a certain kind of similar visions
that were always different but they call it global coordination for these issues to communicate is more profound is I think one of the for me most action issues
but you are the best example of that on courage if we take the other directors directing in by right how is it possible that out of the same family you came and went a different direction and your sisters didn't I have good I have even I have to defend parts of this
I'm not a terrible Wagner clan but those who did not were not part of that I'm talking about my direct aunt who was really in Wagner who left as a young woman Nazi Germany she was on the list of him to be killed in the hotel
so let's talk about that too and there's even a direct also descendant was name is Franz Wilhelm Baitler and the primary public with Leo Kessenbach one of the most important cultural figures
he had to escape from Nazi Germany already in June because he was married to a Berlin Jewish woman out coming out from a very important family and so he had to escape so within the family
so I had also orientations including my own mother so you have to make individual audio choice which way you want to follow I think it's all I think it starts there and then of course you have to find of course you need urgently in a certain period also the right people who look after you who who give you advice who who help you because it's difficult
when you are generally spoken the son of a pepper is very difficult to be also a child of a victim so you need this kind of exchange putting yourself in you know in the position of the other and as I know with free decades experience
it's a very delicate and sometimes also very painful experience but it has to be done there's no other choice I think your question was more how come the same father the same mother the same education more or less give such different outcomes
but of course it depends who is influencing you more it must not always be the father who is who has an impact on your daughter so we all have might be in my case I was lucky to have somewhere like a tree that was also a rebellion
but you're also presenting an argument I think which would the Turkish governments should listen to because if you you Germany has recognized its role and so it makes it easier for you to have developed from that position forward
but if the government doesn't recognize the role the Turks can't really work this out some have but the general population cannot have because they don't have the recognition to say okay so that did happen and now we are going to move forward
they are stuck and it's I think the in my view the Turkish government should realize should recognize that no matter what they say the world population considers them as having committed this atrocity so they're in a way walking around
with the stain on them which is affecting their relationship internationally it's affecting their whole application to the European Union and if they so in the past this was done with apologies and move forward they start removing the stain
but for some reason they can't so they've been effect criminalize criminalize the act and that goes on to the list I think or helplessness I'm hopeful for Turkey I mean this is I don't see that it's negatively
no I mean I really had I'm talking with also scholars in this issue for three decades and and I'm not it's not only about this year so it's not a period and there are things that going on and we should give them help we should support they should be
actively integrated the young Turks but I think the hopelessness and the helplessness a big factor in in collective trauma that isn't necessarily present in those cases where a soldier will go up with with his company but it's also
interesting to think of collective consciousness so it wasn't the first consciousness that we thought of it was individual consciousness and we're kind of going up and down this ladder of an individuality if you will and it gets interesting to think of and collective
even a psychological term it came from sociology it's Durkheim and he talks about the social organism we can make building on that I think some interesting comparisons between how societies cultures ethnicities
however you want to define a group are able to deal with traumatic experiences by looking at how individuals do that we can look at how groups of perpetrators manifest certain characteristics that are very similar to perpetrators that are individuals
and so what would happen if Turkey said okay what would happen if Armenians just got over it how does that happen individually and if you have one perpetrator saying no I didn't do it I didn't do it everybody saying you're doing it what's what's my natural inclination if I'm the one who's denying it honestly it's probably to deny it even harder
dig in my heels let's go at it until the other side says you know what I'm done and you think how many times have we gone through that in our lives with individuals maybe we can think of how that might also play out on a larger theater
well I think that's clearly a case where that kind of denial is part of the trauma I mean it becomes perpetuating it and I would you know love to hear more about your own work to what extent do you think impacted survivors generations of survivors in the Armenian case the fact that the struggle over
recognition of identity in public has been so contested or and it's often raised as a question and I mean even if one takes the case I think just recently down in the lower Broadway near Wall Street
the plaque commemorating a slave market I think is being affixed and if how would that transform the geography of New York City if we finally realized okay all of these docs were built by slaves this was where the market was
formed the perception of the non recognition in that case that still plagues our society but I'm wondering about how do you think that it impacts psychoanalytic therapy or the process of working through the denial and recognition
yeah and maybe I can address the psychotherapeutic situation first and just dovetail on what you said earlier that beyond would talk about the psychotherapist the analyst and the
denialist and in the same room together and that's all you can go off of you can't go off of anything else that they're bringing in that's all here say so you stay in the room and every individual that you're going to deal with every Armenian every Jew
every Vietnamese person every person from a one day we can go on down the list of genocides that have happened will manifest those traumatic experiences differently so there is again going back to this
these different levels of consciousness there might be something in common with other people who had similar narratives but they won't be the same narratives never are they going to be the same narratives how can you do your work and your sister does her work
it so how are they the same narratives how closer can you get than siblings and I think it also accounts yes just say something sometimes also a very political I'm talking about very concretely
there are 300 letters of utter fiddler with a Wagner clan there are in possession still handled like a private property but they belong to the to the to Germany so I'm since 20 years at this has to be put on the table
and discussed out with his story interdisciplinary discussion and no here we are that if it is still because there's a contradiction for me or from the government side they know about that
and they are silencing it up and they are miss Michael or one side oh yes we have cause health and Israel and all the moment on the same time you're covering 300 letters from other fiddler
in the period of 1923 to 1945 so there's a contradiction which is quite you know which has to also be discussed out it's not a family issue it's a public issue
300 letters of fiddler international topic for me at least so here we are it's centering the family structure and the public and society structure is much broader the topic
that's what you're trying to say that there are different in interaction of collective and individual life what you were trying to express
absolutely and there I think you can't really work through with trauma unless you can talk about it I think I and I think that the discussion hasn't been able to be opened in a lot of ways for our minions in particular
because it hasn't been able to be discussed as openly as possible documents on your side now should be known and that's going to take some time and once you once we can talk about it then we can start to work through it and that might take another 40 years
that might take a couple of generations so that stuff can be not just on the on the individual level but grandparents can ask or grandchildren can ask their grandparents and that's the beginning of talking and perhaps that's also a factor in that
40 year gap but you know we it's come up a few times that the sort of seminal events in these processes are trials like literal trials Nuremberg and others and I think what you're talking about in a individual setting is a form of a trial I mean it's a much safer thing but really because it's not just to discuss but it's to have a reckoning of some sort I mean like an acknowledgement of the
the gravity of the situation of the acts and their ongoing consequences and I wonder like what you all think like do you need a trial of some sort no matter what your role is in this is as victim as perpetrator I mean especially as victim you talk about our minions it's like if you don't have the trial and it's not recognized by the Turks or in this case by the American President
what does that do to your your how you carry this weight I mean it's a bit of a denial it's a bit of a betrayal almost of your sense of what's right and in the meantime also I mean we're talking about if it this takes time over 40 years when you have people who are traumatized we're talking about big picture but at the same time
all the little things are happening and not just you know I mean depression anxiety sleeplessness lack of concentration all these things that amongst a group really affect how you develop a near as a family or what have you and if you don't get this reckoning of one form or another that's just going to keep going
absolutely and so what would be gained by a trial one could ask for some people that might be very important that might provide them with a meaning making framework and now we can say okay now we've been we've received whatever vengeance that we've
we put them on trial okay for another Armenian and by the way us 10 of them what would you want from Turkey and you'll get 11 different answers but really I think it's up to individuals to start making
these making their own meaning and being able to share that in a way that can viscerally impact the other as time goes on and in one way that the Armenian community has tried to do that is say all right
Turkey's not going to recognize the genocide probably not now probably not in the
but what we can do is try to make some sense out of it and so what the church did is they decided to make all of the million and a half martyrs or not all of them but or not that not just a million and a half but they're all all of those that perished during the genocide are now martyrs
so that's a way at least spiritually to sort of provide some sense of meaning but that's not going to help everybody no no but I think you look at say Rwanda right now when they're probably people here know this better than I do but they have in place of sort of criminal
trials they've had kind of public acknowledgments of bringing together victims and perpetrators to certain of the killers the genocide errors they've had to publicly state what they did and it's a you I don't know if you could call it a form of
cleansing or a form of reckoning or something like that but having both parties participate that is a bit of a contract to say yes it happened I hear you you know now we can maybe carry on and from what I hear and what I've read there's been some good effects of that but at the same time of course right over the border and DRC and Congo you have the sort of
the the sort of detritus of this war ongoing people still killing each other and total chaos for run days on the brink as well I mean yeah so I mean right and so I think you have a problem of scale if nothing else like how do you address all of this beyond just the individual level
but this is South Africa find a way to move forward I don't know too much about that I mean it was it was public truth commissions I think they call it truth and reconciliation
and just important to build that into the process and reconciliation oh yeah I mean because if you have to and perpetuate the cycle I mean but it's very understandable but that perpetuates you cycle the other thing you're a victim you take revenge then you're a perpetrator
so you still have to you have to take that on as well and maybe it feels good and certainly can understand in many cases why you would want to do it and then like on a visceral level how you would might feel or a cultural level you might feel compelled to do it but if you're going to talk about getting me that stage where you reach what you know what's called post traumatic
growth that's not going to do it I think also especially now you with you also story I think it's that the voice is now so clear and it cannot be changed
this is extremely it's depressing that it took 100 years but the fact that it is now recognized let's also see the I think for you it should be very important as I said for the future how do you see that
as I said I don't have any personal it's okay but anyway I know because of my very different from the Armenians who were in Turkey I have I come my family comes from a different part of Armenia
but I think and it seems to me that this year at least and this is more the views of an observer it seems to me at least this year with the pope taking such a clear position
I've awakened a lot of recognition amongst everybody about what happened and I think it's a positive development I think there is a problem however and which Germany has to be solved in terms of the matter of restitution
but what we are talking about that whole eastern part of Turkey Armenians have can claim right to property there are churches there are all sorts of things that Armenians if it is recognized can start claiming
and that another I think can one have any kind of reconciliation that's not purely instrumental for kind of the functioning of the economy and how do we get the basic wheels moving again and I do think the issue of justice
ultimately restitution not just reconciliation but has to happen in the context of justice as well and that might even involve putting that void that absence of building around the void and saying that we can't actually this is something that will always remain
eligible and there isn't an a possibility to that's a wound that can never be healed and there are some I think historically and going forward every future generation will have to go through part of their education in engaging and confronting with these traumas
but I think that they can be worked through at the same time and even there is I would say some sense of spontaneous recovery from trauma and at least I can speak for myself as a fourth generation Armenian American my great grandparents all of them
came here few before the genocide a few during and I have met several Turks from Turkey and will talk and there is a way in which implicitly we just know that we don't need to say anything about what happened
that we have moved on somehow in a way that we know what happened it affects us it will continue to but somehow an acknowledgement of what happened in both of our minds makes it possible to have a discussion that doesn't even need to go there
and can be very amiable and how did that happen did I work through this in therapy no did my family is you know what my extended family go how did this how did this happen and I think perhaps from another perspective nothing is spontaneous
but I don't want to get into synchronicity right now however I think that we're built I think as human beings to be able to at some point perhaps make sense of something that we're really meaningless for us or we struggle to to wrap our minds around it
I mean it sounds some of the adaptationists so socially adaptationist and I wonder if it's perspectival the weakest link or the strongest and even though it's almost a cliche of narratives to say they built a business and they have all these generations
and they're kind of these heroic human but the sort of hardcore the broken links the stories that will never be told are for whom survivors ship is a crisis that survival is in itself becomes there's almost an envy of the dead or an envy of the victims that I wish I ended up there
and because I have to confront and they were released from having to witness their own their own death but I think seeing the world of today I think we what is my feeling about what's going on we never the last of all what happens
become cynical about human rights I think that when we come to this point and we have that physically you know talking about 80,000 came in the last two months and so this is a very physical experience and one has to find ways of international communication
it's really this is like a house is burning down and people watch and nothing happens we have that now
very literal case so but you know we have even in our little village I'm living a little village where my wife is the mayor of a little so there are empty apartments and now it's was a decision of the also of the government
so we have to bring them give them a house so that is the situation it's rather rather present and can create a lot of social tensions and all that so we better watch out
and so unfortunately these issues are much more concrete racism is growing and prejudice as we have Italy League or not who are preaching really all the racism
it's a tough period but I think one has no choice then to resist and speak up
and to that point there's a group in Israel and Palestinian territory is called combatants for peace which is Israeli ex-soldinian ex-militants from Fata not from Hamas
but they've come together to say we used to fight each other we were both victims and perpetrators and on that language but they're trying to work to affect social change on some level
psychologically it's a remarkable story and some of the things these guys have done and transitions they've made in their own thinking and lives are quite astounding functionally I don't think it has much of a difference it doesn't make much of a difference
it's not to say you shouldn't do it but but you need a chorus of these sorts of efforts to happen all at the same time and I think like you say notice the ones that are doing something really quite special
but also you know you mentioned a house being on fire and no one's looking we had houses on fire neighborhoods on fire just the other day and everyone was looking and focusing just on that and isolating it just the house or the streets on fire without trying to unravel
where does that come from why is that happening why would people do this right exactly and I think it's related you know you talk about slave markets in New York City and like could you draw those lines could you unravel the situation and who is going to go that far back and who would then act on that in any way that was
I think in which role play the media again what's that the media well you know unfortunately you know we had I'm living a country where 70% are controlled by ballast Coney of the media and know what we are talking about
and this is all money pollution or some information why I think so this is tough we don't have where this going so no matter what we have heard but education comes out with the right media no yeah but I think I think there's fewer and fewer
and more and more around that now and I think the stories that one would want told are out there is just trying to connect them and I think it is you know it's easy when you show the same piece of footage 50 times in an hour to make it seem like that happen that is still happening the whole time when it's not it's one clip
and it's the same time and you know these broader stories are out there and this is one of the great things about the internet and other things and the immediacy of things like social media which is there is not a control on the narrative it's just a competition
you know okay I think one side is changing it's a very tough situation with the media so if you have questions you walk to the microphone.
Hello hello I was interested in moving forward what steps I guess practical pragmatic steps can parents and those who have any influence over the education system K to 12 and universities
to reduce net future traumas so if we can assume that wars are going to continue happening in our lifetime my lifetime everyone's lifetime I guess who has some time to go
you know what sort of steps aside from being proponents of therapy all sorts of psychology, psychiatry what other things moving forward is it perhaps showing more clips spending more time in the curriculum focusing on what the effects of these wars were
you know conversations like this you know boil down to kind of have some sort of effect so when they do actually happen the net absorption of trauma is less so I don't know maybe someone read something about that or know something
I wish I could answer all the questions I wish I could have a good answer for all these questions but maybe that's talking together and getting to know the other side of oneself and the way they act
like maybe you could have because I have no good recipes to give to that question maybe add you have some recipes I'm not sure what what you're asking to see
after seeing all that I guess that what it comes down to is how do we reduce future net traumas attributed to war not traumas I personally have a very pessimistic view of that which is that it's impossible
it's gonna happen time and time again there is a part of us that has it's no different than animals who jump on each other and kill each other and I don't think we can ever I guess perhaps it's just getting our youth and those that are even in older ages to have as integrated
and wholesome of a psyche so that whenever fragmentation does occur it doesn't the toll of the trauma doesn't take as much of an effect I don't know I'm just trying to get my
great if we could achieve that we're talking about human nature too which is is it education education education
okay debu or expansion I think within trauma studies one of the ideas that was floated is essentially a movement about the awareness of death of death awareness movement that even within end of life debates today
the role of the doctor in whether it's medical intervention with disease or choices there still seems to be a way in which that there's a taboo that a move towards a greater awareness of what that ultimately means in medical ethics and education and in treatment and therapy
that at the heart as we said earlier of these two traumas of Warren genocide is mass death is awareness of death and perhaps if we began with the individual confrontation that could be a bridge to the larger political question
whether there was a story in the Times magazine I'm sure this I've only read half of it to be about the brain empathy researcher who I think was in Toronto please correct me if I'm wrong because I'm halfway through who is actually studying what in the brain is the thing that gets triggered
for someone to have an empathetic reaction to others the suffering of others and I think that's a different sort of thing we talk about brain science could you then adapt something like that and there's certainly some some possible sinister
applications of this and to try to create a soldier who does not feel trauma but to be watched out for but I think you know on one level have those sorts of understandings I think like even since this is involved if you're trying to understand a situation
don't just take it from one side or the other or what have you and then I think also when you're talking about the future generations going forward try to impart a sense that this you know these living in the aftermaths of these events is a fraught enterprise
but it is not inevitability like there are options and and those who can introduce some of those people that want can use their lives I mean I don't say that lightly I mean some people up on Pine Ridge Reservation or in Gaza or wherever you know would think like that's where my life is going
you know where there are opportunities to say like well what about that or like here's another possibility that just opens up I think the
the abilities in ways that can perhaps remove one from that isn't that trauma can be
you know the chemical oxytocin increases empathy oxytocin anybody there now for you for your discipline of course always the concept of the enemy is one of the for me the most important issues
that the need always to have the enemy you know this is there is something profoundly profoundly talking about your discipline outside enemy inside enemy exactly yes but yes but it is a very serious issue it is
a global issue because there's no one behind me there's just a couple of thoughts that just came to my mind
I know you know there's such things as terrorism drills and bystander intervention training and things like that also what you just mentioned I think it reminds me of a you know there's certain death cafes I guess they only talk about death and how it makes you feel more alive than ever
and there are things like death meditations as well of which I personally don't and have really transcended what what can happen so I guess I don't know just very very helpful any other questions anybody else come up to the
mention was made about American soldiers did comparing it with the Nazi thing and we just recently had discussed me lie and it was very interesting because there's a lot of GIs that are stressed out dramatically some of which have gone back to Vietnam to live
and the extraordinary thing I'd like to hear some comments on was that this one fellow American found a little boy who was in me lie or somewhere near where there was this massacre that went on
and these soldiers apparently from what I can learn I was aware of it when it happened back in 60 whatever was 68 they just started tossing grenades in and firing and this Cali character gave the order for them to kill all these people there's only women and children
no combatants but the extraordinary thing was that the Vietnamese boy who's now a man didn't seem to bear any anger it was just really hard to understand he said well you know he was talking and speaking translate but he said well the point of it is he says you know you have to move on and they're very they're so hospitable and kind to Americans
Americans they go over there and the American guy that was doing the had went there the soldier he said I couldn't understand how to fit and he speak could be so so kind and forgiving
well I mean I think it's is the Seymour Hersh article right in the New Yorkers that well that was one of the other red that and yeah that there was also there's been some affluory of them on the radio right and there I mean there were a few people Americans living in Vietnam still who fought and who do demining and work on Agent Orange
and other things yeah I think you know like I said earlier I think it's just kind of remarkable what what some people in Vietnam can do but I also think there is self-interest in it and I don't mean that in any bad way I mean it's just I think there's and I don't know where it comes from because I don't to be frank you know enough about kind of the culture and then the underpinnings of is it confusion is it buddha's
or you know like how these different strains of things play into it but yeah that sense of moving forward I think is is very very profound and I think in a way that you spoke of with with speaking the Turks in the sense of like what we were all there we don't really need to talk about it I mean we're kind of live it together our processing as we move through it is pretty profound and also it was not the last war I mean I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know how much I think that we have to talk about it.
I don't know I don't think that war is as big of a deal there as it is here even though the impacts were far more profound but it was part of a tapestry of events that I think were the story of the second half of the 20th century in Vietnam was all these wars and then it's it changed the after war you know post war and it's also an interesting thing where you have these guys going back and there's there's
guys who go back to Iraq to when you look at you know the evolution of trauma in someone's life or the evolution of someone's effort to understand their wartime experience it definitely changes over time I mean what happens when the kid who's 22 comes home
and when some of these guys are older very different because later on you're confronting your own mortality you're you know you're starting to think about taking stock of your life and why did I do this and why did I do that so having having a story like that come out now 40 years later
is very instructive I think in a lot of ways and if you look you know we talk about military suicides that the majority of those are people over 50 it's not people who just got back
because if you get to a point where things just don't make sense and you're so far past the context where you can't remember why it was that you did that thing or it no longer suits it no longer makes any sense anymore
I mean it can be I think a huge huge rupture but I think in the cases of quite a number and I don't want to say all but Vietnamese people and I don't have the answer of like why or how I wish I did and I'd like to kind of hopefully look at it further because I think it is really a quite incredible example
thank you respect to the first person's question Steven Pinker has documented there's been a very noticeable decrease in violence and wars over the centuries and people forget how bad it was hundreds of years ago
as all forms of violence but my question is is there a difference between trauma experienced by victims do their human causes versus natural causes all right the difference between say the Japan and tsunami or the earthquake now and Tibet
what's that trauma like compared to war trauma
I would say the similarities and the aftermath is the sense that all of a sudden something can happen that can end your life or change it irrevocably
but knowing what the causes are sort of mother nature should we say versus another person who may have been your neighbor or may have been somehow similar to you
speaking I think is quite different I think it's a different experience of trauma when you know it is someone else did that to you versus the power of the gods so to speak
I mean and I think that's why a lot of those gods exist because that power that's out there had to be manifested in one way or another represented in one way or another
it's not to say it's easier but I think you don't have that same sense of quite the same sense of well you definitely don't have a sense of how could somebody do this because there is no somebody
and if you lived in place I mean if you're living in Nepal you know it is a on a fault line you know there are huge mountains you know there are snowfalls things like this that could do that I mean you know if you're living in coastal Sri Lanka
the ocean is a powerful thing and you have some sense of that and it can rise up and I think that it's almost in a weird way it's almost more logical
and I think that helps like having some sense of why and how it might happen helps in a way or can help in a way
well I think the additionally as it said that humans are really the only species to gratuitously kill the the the defenseless without any instrumental reason I mean that it does provoke a very direct and profound challenge to any kind of basic sense of security in the world
and also politically and I think even just the debates over the causes of genocide why it is so perpetually baffling and productive of debates is this this search for an instrumental cause was this a self interested act was this a suicidal act
and the the lack of satisfaction that it leads for the the after world there's a way in which that a natural disaster doesn't pose the question of of interest of human interest and therefore for explanation but it's a great question because I know that originally the very organizing principle for the round table
and trauma was to separate precisely natural versus man made as a basic divide from species and monkeys that kill pretty fivously to steal the other tribes women and females and it's pretty I think it's pretty well documented now that
well it's also a question of whether genocide why are we distinguishing mass murder from genocide and why this does have a different category and that it's again a function of modernity of itself a capacity that human achievement has made possible
that was not there in previous centuries so it does a narrative of progress and even though right I mean the pink has been very heavily criticized for again creating a kind of triumphalist narrative of progress that all the examples of war and genocide seem to
facilitate against that are germane to the 20th century so if you make a quant qualification or quantification of well there are x number of wars have been reduced but how does that stand with the capacity for nuclear annihilation and genocide against
all you it's a value discussion perhaps but thank you anybody else yes I would just like to raise the issue of how much certain people's unconscious carries a trauma that they don't even know they've had I have
a teacher who has worked with patients and their dreams bring up that their parents are not really their parents and then it turns out that the ones they think are their parents are those who killed their parents who were among the
people that they're not going to do it so I think that's an incredible and that I've had instances where someone who's jumped they were Jewish and didn't know it but were carrying all this imagery from the Holocaust so I would just like a couple of comments about that Eva
well I'll try to that raises a question of what the unconscious knows and doesn't know and the way it in it it it's not know is in dreams of course our way of of expressing what is not consciously known it's true but
it's you can push the question for that means how is it transmitted how do you get all these notions and emptiness is it true a blank is it unconscious communication which is not well known but still we know it exists
it is true certain signs that we don't recognize as obvious signs it raises a whole question of transmission of transmissions and what but it's this this stories of this a Paris C does in Argentina it's still open
the idea of the round table doctor necessity and mention I mean some of the most kind of exciting researchers epigenetic transgenerational trauma the fact that we now have more evidence that can be encoded even in the genetic material before actual experience
priori to the human life but epigenetic means that it's encoded but it can only appear in certain and their unviron mental situation it means it's not genetic complete I mean it's not like you inherit the blue eyes or whatever
to in order to be active it has to find and some kind of encounter that means something between the genes and the I've had you say unviron mental issues so okay
thank you